# Nature of Malayalam spelling mistakes

Malayalam uses an alphasyllabary writing system. Each letter you  write corresponds to the grapheme representation of a phoneme. In  broader sense Malayalam can be considered as a language with one to one   grapheme to phoneme correspondence. Where as in English and similar  languages, letters might represent a variety of sounds, or the same  sounds can be written in different ways. The way a person learns writing  a language strongly depends on the writing system.

In Malayalam, since there is one and only one set of characters that  can correspond to a syllable, the confusion of letters does not happen.  For example, in English, Educa**tio**n, **Sh**ip, Ma**ch**ine, Mi**ssi**on all has sh sound \[ʃ]. So a person can mix up these combinations. But in Malayalam, if it is _sh_ sound \[ʃ], then it is always ഷ.

Because of this, the spelling mistakes that is resulted by four edit  operations(deletion, insertion, change, or transposition) may not be an  accurate classification of errors in Malayalam.  Let us try to classify  and analyse the spelling mistake patterns of Malayalam.\


1. **Phonetic approximation:** The 1:1 grapheme to  phoneme correspondence is the theory. But because of this the inaccurate  utterance of syllables will cause incorrect spellings. For example,  ബൂമി is a relaxed way of reading for ഭൂമി since it is relatively  effortless. Since the relaxed way of pronunciation is normal, sometimes  people think that they are writing in wrong way and will try to correct  it unnecessarily പീഢനം->പീഡനം is one such example.**Consonants**:  Each consonant in Malayalam has aspirated, unaspirated, voiced and  unvoiced variants. Between them, it is very usual to get mixed up**Aspirated and Unaspirated mix-up**:  Aspirated consonant can be mistakenly written as  Unaspirated  consonant. For Example, ധ -> ദ, ഢ -> ഡ . Similarly Unaspirated  consonant can be mistakenly written as aspirated consonant – Example, ദ  ->ധ, ഡ ->ഢ.**Voiced and Voiceless mix-up**. Voiced consonants like ഗ, ഘ can be mistakenly written as voiceless forms ക, ഖ. And vice versa.**Gemination**  of consonants is often relaxed or skipped in the speech, hence it  appear in writing too. Gemination in Malayalam script is by combining  two consonants using virama. നീലതാമര/നീലത്താമര is an example for this  kind of mistakes. There are a few debatable words too, like  സ്വർണം/സ്വർണ്ണം, പാർടി/പാർട്ടി. Another way of consonant stress  indication is by using _Unaspirated Consonant + Virama + Aspirated Consonant_. അദ്ധ്യാപകൻ/അധ്യാപകൻ, തീർഥം/തീർത്ഥം, വിഡ്ഡി/വിഡ്ഢി pairs are examples.Hard, Soft variants confusion. Examples: ശ/ഷ, ര/റ, ല/ള**Vowels**: Vowel elongation or shortening, [gliding vowels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diphthong) and [semi vowels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semivowel) are the cause for vowel related mistakes in writing.Each  vowel in Malayalam can be a short vowel or long vowel. Local dialect  can confuse people to use one for the other. ചിലപ്പൊൾ/ചിലപ്പോൾ is one  example. Since many input tools place the short and long vowels forms  with very close keystrokes, it is possible to cause errors. In Inscript  keyboard, short and long vowels are in normal and shift position. In  transliteration based input methods, long vowel is often typed by  repeated keys(i, ii for ി, ീ). The vowel ഋ is close to റി  or റു in pronunciation. Example: ഋതു/റിതു. The vowel sign of ഋ while  appearing with a consonant is close to ്ര. Example ഗൃഹം/ഗ്രഹം.  ഹൃദയം/ഹ്രുദയം. [Gliding vowels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diphthong) ഐ, ഔ get confused with its constituent vowels. കൈ/കഇ/കയ്, ഔ/അഉ/അവു are example.In  Malayalam, there is a tendency to use എ instead of ഇ, since the reduced  effort. Examples: ചിലവ്/ചെലവ്, ഇല/എല, തിരയുക/തെരയുക. Due to wide usage  of these variants, it is sometimes very difficult to say one word is  wrong. See the discussion about the ‘Standard Malayalam’ at the end of  this essay.**Chillus**: Chillus are pure  consonants. A consonant + virama sequence sometimes has no phonetic  difference from a chillu. For example, കല്പന/കൽപന, നിൽക്കുക/നില്ക്കുക  combinations. The chillu ർ is sometimes confused with ഋ sign. Examples  are: പ്രവർത്തി/പ്രവൃത്തി. The chillu form of മ – ം can appear are as  anuswara or ma+virama forms. Examples: പംപ, പമ്പ. But it is not rare to  see പംമ്പ for this. Sometimes, the anuswara get confused with ന്, and  പമ്പ becomes പന്പ. There were a few buggy fonts that used ന്+പ for മ്പ  ligature too.
2. **Weak Phoneme-Grapheme correspondence:**  Due to historic or evolutionary nature of the script, Malayalam also  has some phonemes which has a weak relationship with the graphemes.ഹ്മ/  മ്മ as in ബ്രഹ്മം/ബ്രമ്മം, ന്ദ/ന്ന as in നന്ദി/നന്നി, ഹ്ന/ന്ന  as in  ചിഹ്നം/ചിന്നം are some examples where what you pronounce is not exactly  same as what you write.റ്റ, ന്റ – These two highly used  conjuncts heavily deviate from the letters and pronunciation. While  writing using pen, people don’t make much mistakes since they just draw  the shape of these ligatures, but while typing, one need to know the  exact key sequence and they get confused. Common mistakes for these  conjuncts are ററ, ൻറ, ൻറ്റ , ൻററ
3. **Visual similarity**:  While using visual input methods such as handwriting based or some  onscreen keyboards, either the users or the input tool makes mistakes  due to visual similarityൃ, ്യ often get confused.ജ്ഞ, ഞ്ജ is one very common sequence where people are confused. ആദരാജ്ഞലി/ആദരാഞ്ജലി.ത്സ, ഝ is another combinationThe handwriting based input methods like Google handwriting tool is known for recognizing anuswara ം as zero, English o, O etc.When  people don’t know how to insert visarga ഃ, and since there is a very  similar key in keyboard- colon : they use it. Example: ദുഃഖം/ദു:ഖംള്ള,  the geminated form of ള, is very similar to two adjacent ള. This kind  of mistakes are very frequent among people whi studied Malayalam  inputting informally. Two adjacent റ, is another mistake for റ്റ,The  informal, trial-and-error based Malayalam inputting training also  introduced some other mistakes such as using open parenthesis ‘(‘ for  ്ര, closing parenthesis ‘)’ for ാ sign.
4. **Ambiguity due to regional dialect**:  A good example for this is insertion of യ് in verbs.  കുറക്കുക/കുറയ്ക്കുക, ചിരിക്കുക/ചിരിയ്ക്കുക, Also in nominal inflections:  പൂച്ചയ്ക്ക്/പൂച്ചക്ക്.  Usuage of Samvruthokaram to distinguish between  a pure consonant and stressed consonant at the end of word is a highly  debated topic. For example, അവന്/അവനു്/അവനു. All these forms are common,  even though the usage of നു് is less after the script reformation. But  since script reformation was not an absolute transformation, it still  exist in usage
5. **Spaces:** Malayalam is an  agglutinative language. Words can be agglutinated, but nothing prevents  people to put space and write in simple words. But this should be done  carefully since it can alter the meaning. An example is “ആന പുറത്തു  കയറി”, ആനപ്പുറത്തു കയറി”, “ആനപ്പുറത്തുകയറി”, “ആനപ്പുറത്ത് കയറി”. Another  example: “മലയാള ഭാഷ”, “മലയാളഭാഷ” – Here, there is no valid word  “മലയാള”. The anuswara at the end get deleted only when it joins with ഭാഷ  as adjective. A morphology analyser can correctly parse “മലയാളഭാഷ” as  മലയാളം\<proper-noun>\<adjective>ഭാഷ\<noun>. But since  language already broke this rule and many people are liberally using  space, a spellchecker would need to handle this cases.
6. **Slip of Finger:**  Accidental insertions or omissions of key presses is the common reason  for spelling mistakes. For alphabetic language, mostly this type of  errors are addressed. For Malayalam also, this type of accidental slip  of finger can happen. For Latin based languages,  we can make some  analysis since we know a QWERTY keyboard layout and do optimized checks  for this kind of issues. Since Malayalam will use another level of  mapping on top of QWERTY for inputting(inscript, phonetic,  transliteration), it is not easy to analyse this errors. So, in general,  we can expect random characters or omission of some characters in the  query word. An accidental space insertion has the challenge that it will  split the word to two words and if the spellchecking is done by one  word at a time, we will miss it.

{% hint style="warning" %}
I must add that the above classification is not based on a systematic  study of any test data that I can share. Ideally, this classification  should done with real sample of Malayalam written on paper and computer.  It should be then manually checked for spelling mistakes, list down the  mistakes and analyse the patterns. This exercise would be very  beneficial for spellcheck research. In my case, even since I released my  word list based spellchecker, noticing spelling errors in  internet(social media, mainly) has been my obsession. Sometimes I also  tried to point out spelling mistakes to authors and that did not give  much pleasant experience to me. The above list is based on my observation from such patterns.
{% endhint %}

{% hint style="info" %}
The common Malayalam spelling mistakes and confusables were presented in great depth by Renowned linguist and author [Panmana Ramachandran Nair](https://panmana.com) in his books  ‘തെറ്റില്ലാത്ത മലയാളം’, ‘തെറ്റും ശരിയും’, ‘ശുദ്ധ മലയാളം’ and ‘നല്ല മലയാളം’.
{% endhint %}
